MSC4040: Update SRV service name to IANA registration (#4040)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4040-update-srv-service-name.md

Those steps become *deprecated* and new steps which use `_matrix-fed._tcp` are added immediately before
each existing step.

Deprecation in context of this MSC is to discourage continued use, and to queue the affected steps for eventual
removal from the specification under the [deprecation policy](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.7/#deprecation-policy).

The new steps thus become:

1. (unchanged) If the hostname is an IP literal, then that IP address should be used, together with the
   given port number, or 8448 if no port is given. The target server must present a valid certificate for
   the IP address. The `Host` header in the request should be set to the server name, including the port if
   the server name included one.

2. (unchanged) If the hostname is not an IP literal, and the server name includes an explicit port, resolve
   the hostname to an IP address using CNAME, AAAA or A records. Requests are made to the resolved IP address
   and given port with a `Host` header of the original server name (with port). The target server must present
   a valid certificate for the hostname.

> 3. (unchanged) If the hostname is not an IP literal, a regular HTTPS request is made to `https://<hostname>/.well-known/matrix/server`,

Reviewer: I think it's misleading to mark this as "unchanged" when steps have been modified.  Can you change the label to indicate this?  Maybe something like

```suggestion
3. (steps added/deprecated) If the hostname is not an IP literal, a regular HTTPS request is made to `https://<hostname>/.well-known/matrix/server`,
```

      port with a `Host` header containing the `<delegated_hostname>`. The target server must present a valid
      certificate for `<delegated_hostname>`.

   4. **(DEPRECATED)** If `<delegated_hostname>` is not an IP literal and no `<delegated_port>` is present, an
      SRV record is looked up for `_matrix._tcp.<delegated_hostname>`. This may result in another hostname (to
      be resolved using AAAA or A records) and port. Requests should be made to the resolved IP address and port
      with a `Host` header containing the `<delegated_hostname>`. The target server must present a valid certificate
      for `<delegated_hostname>`.

   5. (unchanged) If no SRV record is found, an IP address is resolved using CNAME, AAAA or A records. Requests
      are then made to the resolve IP address and a port of 8448, using a `Host` header of `<delegated_hostname>`.
      The target server must present a valid certificate for `<delegated_hostname>`.

4. **(ADDED)** If the `/.well-known` request resulted in an error response, a server is found by resolving an
   SRV record for `_matrix-fed._tcp.<hostname>`. This may result in a hostname (to be resolved using AAAA or A

>    records) and port. Requests are made to the resolved IP address and port, using 8448 as a default port, with

Reviewer 2: default port makes no sense here. SRV records always specify a port.

Author: this is copy/paste from the spec - issue tracked here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/1568

Reviewer 2: can we just fix that, please, rather than propagating the brainfart further.

Reviewer 2: (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/pull/1615)

   address is resolved using CNAME, AAAA and A records. Requests are made to the resolved IP address using port
   8448 and a `Host` header containing the `<hostname>`. The target server must present a valid certificate for
   `<hostname>`.

## Potential issues

Us using `matrix` as a service name has been an issue all along. This MSC aligns the specification with our
formal IANA registration.

## Alternatives

We could modify our IANA registration further to pick a different name, however the service name needs to be
descriptive and short. The author notes that `matrix-server` was attempted in registration, which was declined
during Expert Review of the application.

`matrix` cannot be taken over via IANA process. It was assigned before dates were put on records in 2000.

Non-options for names include `mxfed`, `matrixf`, and similar.

A potential way forward is to remove SRV resolution entirely, however prior effort via
[MSC3922](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3922) are expected to be *rejected* instead
(as of writing, August 4th, 2023).

## Security considerations

> Increased

Reviewer: ?

> # MSC4040: Update SRV service name to IANA registration

Reviewer 2: > There's no unstable implementation required because there's no ability to prefix this. We don't require implementation on trivial MSCs either.

I'm not entirely convinced by either of these arguments.

1. Prefixing isn't the only way we have to prove an implementation. You could use a private federation or, in this case, I think it would be pretty safe to use a temporary deployment connected to the public federation.
2. I don't feel like these are trivial changes.

Author: I would argue they're extremely trivial: https://github.com/turt2live/matrix-media-repo/pull/427

Author: I've also deployed this to my own homeserver as a test:

![image](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/assets/1190097/3625c323-f753-4729-8e74-b195a0c5be7b)

6. (unchanged) If the `/.well-known` request returned an error response, and the SRV record was not found, an IP
   address is resolved using CNAME, AAAA and A records. Requests are made to the resolved IP address using port
   8448 and a `Host` header containing the `<hostname>`. The target server must present a valid certificate for
   `<hostname>`.

## Potential issues

Us using `matrix` as a service name has been an issue all along. This MSC aligns the specification with our
formal IANA registration.

## Alternatives

We could modify our IANA registration further to pick a different name, however the service name needs to be
descriptive and short. The author notes that `matrix-server` was attempted in registration, which was declined
during Expert Review of the application.

`matrix` cannot be taken over via IANA process. It was assigned before dates were put on records in 2000.

Non-options for names include `mxfed`, `matrixf`, and similar.

A potential way forward is to remove SRV resolution entirely, however prior effort via
[MSC3922](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3922) are expected to be *rejected* instead

> (as of writing, August 4th, 2023).

Reviewer 2: I am somewhat :-1: on this (MSC4040) and would still prefer that we drop SRV support.

I continue to feel that the current SRV support serves almost entirely to confuse people; a significant portion of the traffic in `#synapse:matrix.org` continues to be people trying and failing to set up federation because they are using SRV records with the wrong certificates.

Erik raises good points at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3922#discussion_r1022527789 but the fact remains that correctly configuring a deployment using SRV records instead of `.well-known` is so damn hard that virtually nobody does it.  Even `matrix.org` uses a .well-known file, and if anyone could benefit from avoiding the `.well-known`, it's `matrix.org`.

Adding *even more* complexity to it seems like, frankly, a retrograde step. If we deprecated SRV records now and then in future it turns out that we can't live without them, then re-introducing them based on `_matrix-fed._tcp` isn't going to be any harder than it is now.

(also: it's not entirely obvious to me that SRV records are the future: [SVCB](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https-12) records look like they might replace them for our purposes).

Still, if everyone else is in favour, I'll not stand in the way.

-0.5 from me on the [Apache Voting Scale](https://www.apache.org/foundation/voting.html)
